README.md, before:

# Molecular Property Profile

A common need when examining collections of molecules is to be able
to compare the new molecules with one or more existing collections.
Answering questions like:

* How does the mean atom count differ between the collections
* Does this collection have more rotatable bonds
* How does `arbitrary molecular property` differ between collections?

The tool works in three phases.

1. Generate molecular features for all collections.
2. Use `generate_profile` to abstract the raw feature data into
 `Descriptor` proto form. This stores a summary of the data.
3. Use `plot_collections` to generate plots that superimpose
different distributions.

## Step 1
Any tool that can generate a tabular file of molecular properties
can be used. It must have a header. I have been using 
[iwdescr](https://github.com/IanAWatson/LillyMol-4.0-Bazel/blob/master/src/Molecule_Tools/iwdescr.cc)
which generates over 200 simple, and usually interpretable molecular
descriptors. But any such tool can be used. All that is needed is that
the result be tabular data, that can be read by Pandas.

In a large collection, computation may take a long time, the resulting
data file may be large, and these calculations may be awkward. Depending
on the need for completeness, large collections may be handled by
drawing random samples. That is what I did for each of the collections
included in this repo, 50k random samples were selected.

If you decide to use iwdescr, the correct invocation would be
```
iwdescr -l -g all -O all -i ICTE -i smi file.smi > file.dat
```

The `-i ICTE` tells it to ignore connection table errors. LillyMol is
not very good at finding Kekule forms for aromatic smiles, and so may
fail, which would otherwise terminate the computation.

## Step 2
Convert these raw data files into protocol buffer form. The Descriptor
[proto](https...)
stores summary information about a feature, together with a description,
summary stats, and sampled values.

If the number of distinct values is less than 100 (an arbitrarily chosen
number that can be changed), then all distinct values are stored. This
is the case even if the values are floats. If there are more than 100
distinct values, then an equally spaced sampling into 100 buckets is
done, using [numpy.histogram](https).

For each feature to be plotted, it is useful to have a description
of what that feature is. So while a column name might be `natoms` a
more meaningful name for a plot might be `Number of Heavy Atoms`. I 
have included a file, `column_descriptions.txt`, which contains
column name descriptions for some of the columns generated by `iwdescr`.

Given that file, the easy way to then generate a summary proto
for calculated features in a file is via something like
(for a collection called `rand`):

```
python generate_profile.py --read_descriptions=column_descriptions.txt
                           --collection rand
                           --stem RAND
                           --color=red
                           rand.dat
```

This processes all columns in `feature_descriptions.txt` and will generate
summary data for each column. Each feature is written to a separate file
of the form `\<stem\>_\<feature_name\>.txt'

Precomputed files for Chembl, Pubchem and Enamine HTS are included.

## Options:

### feature_descriptions
The name of an existing file that contains feature descriptions.
During generation of these protos, certain information must be specified.
The file `column_descriptions.txt` can be used.

### collection
The name of the collection, likely something like Pubchem, Chembl,
molecules from vendor, my virtual library, company collection ....

### stem
A file name stem for the files produced. This should likely be the
same as the collection name.

### color
Using a tool like this over many years showed the value of using consistent
colors for different collections - so that whenever people see a graph they know
that the green curve is Chembl, red is the color for... 
Select colors that seem meaningful and stick to them.

### sep
This is passed to pd.read_csv. The default is space. Expect trouble if you
need to use things like tabs, in that case you might be better off changing
the default in the program.

## Step 3
Once you have > 1 proto files generated, they can be graphically superimposed with
`plot_collections`. This is a command line tool that can either display
the plot on your terminal, or produces .png files if directed.

The individual collections previously profiled will all have different
X ranges. It is the job of plot_collections to line up those different
distributions so they can all be shown on the same scale.

The tool supports some options

### stem
Instead of showing plots on the terminal, write them to disk.
Files will be of the form `\<stem\>_\<feature\>.png`.

### X and Y
Specify a plot size in inches, `--X 6.0 --Y 8.0`. Either omit both, or they
must both be specified.

### xmin and xmax
Specify the x axis range. By default, it will be such that all values from
all collections are displayed. So, if there were a collection that had some
very large molecules, it might be clearer to see the relevant molecules
via something like `-xmin 0 -xmax 60` when viewing heavy atom distributions.

### quantile
Many collections contain outlier type molecules, and if the plot range
is extended to include those, it may be hard to discern important
differences elsewhere due to compression. Use this option to chop
off upper and lower quantiles from what is displayed.

# Summary
A complete workflow, for the collection `foo` might look like
```

iwdescr -i ICTE -i smi -g all -l -O all foo.smi > foo.dat

# Check for errors, file should be tabular, same number of rows
# as `foo.smi`
# Generate feature profiles in the FOO directory.

mkdir FOO
python generate_profile.py --feature_descriptions=column_descriptions.txt
                           --collection foo
                           --stem FOO/FOO
                           --color=red
                            foo.dat

# Check to make sure all FOO*.dat files are produced, one for each feature
# in `column_descriptions.txt`.

# Generate comparison plots for rotatable bonds.

python plot_collections.py FOO/FOO_w_rotbond.dat CHEMBL/CHEMBL_w_rotbond.dat ENAMINE/ENAMINE_w_rotbond.dat

# Or generate plots for all features, based on what is in `column_descriptions.txt`

plot_collections.py --quantile 0.01
                    --collection FOO/FOO,CHEMBL/CHEMBL,ENAMINE/ENAMINE
                    --feature_description column_descriptions.txt
```

This will display the plots on the terminal. Add a `--stem` argument and instead
plots will be written to .png files.

A typical plot might look like

![natoms](./Images/demo_natoms.png)

which shows differing heavy atom counts across three different collections.

Commit message:

Add continuous plot as demo

README.md, after:

# Molecular Property Profile

A common need when examining collections of molecules is to be able
to compare the new molecules with one or more existing collections.
Answering questions like:

* How does the mean atom count differ between these collections?
* Does this collection have more rotatable bonds?
* How does `arbitrary molecular property` differ between collections?

The tool works in three phases.

1. Generate molecular features for all collections.
2. Use `generate_profile` to abstract the raw feature data into
 `Descriptor` proto form. This stores a summary of the data.
3. Use `plot_collections` to generate plots that superimpose
different distributions.

## Step 1
Any tool that can generate a tabular file of molecular properties
can be used. It must have a header. I have been using 
[iwdescr](https://github.com/IanAWatson/LillyMol-4.0-Bazel/blob/master/src/Molecule_Tools/iwdescr.cc)
which generates over 200 simple, and usually interpretable molecular
descriptors. But any such tool can be used. All that is needed is that
the result be tabular data, and that can be read by Pandas.

In a large collection, computation may take a long time, the resulting
data file may be large, and these calculations may be awkward. Depending
on the need for completeness, large collections may be handled by
drawing random samples. That is what I did for each of the collections
included in this repo, 50k random samples were selected.

If you decide to use iwdescr, the correct invocation would be
```
iwdescr -l -g all -O all -i ICTE -i smi file.smi > file.dat
```

The `-i ICTE` tells it to ignore connection table errors. LillyMol is
not very good at finding Kekule forms for aromatic smiles, and so may
fail, which would otherwise terminate the computation.

## Step 2
Convert these raw data files into protocol buffer form. The Descriptor
[proto](https://github.com/IanAWatson/Molecular_Property_Profile/blob/9b99ecb4cd66fdacd17be7f45849a8388d6471a5/collection.proto#L40)
stores summary information about a feature, together with a description,
summary stats, and sampled values.

If the number of distinct values is less than 100 (an arbitrarily chosen
number that can be changed), then all distinct values are stored. This
is the case even if the values are floats. If there are more than 100
distinct values, then an equally spaced sampling into 100 buckets is
done, using [numpy.histogram](https).

For each feature to be plotted, it is useful to have a description
of what that feature is. So while a column name might be `natoms` a
more meaningful name for a plot might be `Number of Heavy Atoms`. I 
have included a file, `column_descriptions.txt`, which contains
column name descriptions for some of the columns generated by `iwdescr`.

Given that file, the easy way to then generate a summary proto
for calculated features in a file is via something like
(for a collection called `rand`):

```
python generate_profile.py --read_descriptions=column_descriptions.txt
                           --collection rand
                           --stem RAND
                           --color=red
                           rand.dat
```

This processes all columns in `feature_descriptions.txt` and will generate
summary data for each column. Each feature is written to a separate file
of the form `\<stem\>_\<feature_name\>.txt'

Precomputed files for Chembl, Pubchem and Enamine HTS are included.

## Options:

### feature_descriptions
The name of an existing file that contains feature descriptions.
During generation of these protos, certain information must be specified.
The file `column_descriptions.txt` can be used.

### collection
The name of the collection, likely something like Pubchem, Chembl,
molecules from vendor, my virtual library, company collection ....

### stem
A file name stem for the files produced. This should likely be the
same as the collection name.

### color
Using a tool like this over many years showed the value of using consistent
colors for different collections - so that whenever people see a graph they know
that the green curve is Chembl, red is the color for... 
Select colors that seem meaningful and stick to them.

### sep
This is passed to pd.read_csv. The default is space. Expect trouble if you
need to use things like tabs, in that case you might be better off changing
the default in the program.

## Step 3
Once you have > 1 proto files generated, they can be graphically superimposed with
`plot_collections`. This is a command line tool that can either display
the plot on your terminal, or produces .png files if directed.

The individual collections previously profiled will all have different
X ranges. It is the job of plot_collections to line up those different
distributions so they can all be shown on the same scale.

The tool supports some options

### stem
Instead of showing plots on the terminal, write them to disk.
Files will be of the form `<stem>_<feature>.png`.

### X and Y
Specify a plot size in inches, `--X 6.0 --Y 8.0`. Either omit both, or they
must both be specified.

### xmin and xmax
Specify the x axis range. By default, it will be such that all values from
all collections are displayed. So, if there were a collection that had some
very large molecules, it might be clearer to see the relevant molecules
via something like `-xmin 0 -xmax 60` when viewing heavy atom distributions.

### quantile
Many collections contain outlier type molecules, and if the plot range
is extended to include those, it may be hard to discern important
differences elsewhere due to compression. Use this option to chop
off upper and lower quantiles from what is displayed.

# Summary
A complete workflow, for the collection `foo` might look like
```

iwdescr -i ICTE -i smi -g all -l -O all foo.smi > foo.dat

# Check for errors, file should be tabular, same number of rows
# as `foo.smi`
# Generate feature profiles in the FOO directory.

mkdir FOO
python generate_profile.py --feature_descriptions=column_descriptions.txt
                           --collection foo
                           --stem FOO/FOO
                           --color=red
                            foo.dat

# Check to make sure all FOO*.dat files are produced, one for each feature
# in `column_descriptions.txt`.

# Generate comparison plots for rotatable bonds.

python plot_collections.py FOO/FOO_w_rotbond.dat CHEMBL/CHEMBL_w_rotbond.dat ENAMINE/ENAMINE_w_rotbond.dat

# Or generate plots for all features, based on what is in `column_descriptions.txt`

plot_collections.py --quantile 0.01
                    --collection FOO/FOO,CHEMBL/CHEMBL,ENAMINE/ENAMINE
                    --feature_description column_descriptions.txt
```

This will display the plots on the terminal. Add a `--stem` argument and instead
plots will be written to .png files.

A typical plot for discrete values might look like

![natoms](./Images/demo_natoms.png)

which shows differing heavy atom counts across three different collections. The
legends show the mean for each collection, and there are small bars across the top
of the plot at the means.

For continuous features a typical plot might look like

![amw](./Images/demo_amw.png)

here the small bars for the means are at the bottom of the plot.

Molecular Property Profiles are an easy means of understanding the
macro properties of one collection compared to another.
